[#FFFFFF]This giant variety of the ordinary ant will fight just as fiercely as its small, distant cousin. Various varieties exist, and they are known and feared for their relentless persecution of their victims.[-]

[#f5e342]Origin[-]

Giant ants - specifically, ants or ant-like creatures that are human-sized or larger - are a popular form of insectoid in science-fiction media, codified by works such as the 1905 H. G. Wells short story Empire of the Ants and the 1954 film Them!. Other notable examples include the Bugs of Starship Troopers, the Formics of Ender's Game, and the ants that accompany Marvel Comics super hero Ant-Man. Like other ants in various forms of fiction, they are commonly portrayed as a hive species, which is a common misconception regarding ant colonies.

The giant ant comes from Dungeons & Dragons:

    "When giant ants are encountered it is 90% likely that they will simply be workers... The queen ant has 10 hit dice, but she neither moves nor attacks. If she is killed the other ants will become confused... for six melee rounds and then leave the nest."
    - Monster Manual (1977), p. 7

Rogue took the worker ant's armor class of 3, its 2 hit dice and its 1-6 bite, and gave it the warrior ant's poison.

While the giant ant does not seem to be based on any particular species, one of the largest known ant species is Dinoponera, a South American genus of ant in the subfamily Ponerinae - they are commonly called tocandiras or giant Amazonian ants. While less known overall than the bullet ant, females of the genus can reach a total body length of 3–4 cm (1.2–1.6 in) or more.

[#f5e342]Rogue Trivia[-]

The giant ant held A in Rogue 3.6, back when the roster still followed Dungeons & Dragons closely. Rogue 5.x gave A to the aquator and dropped the ant. Its bite is poisonous: "Ants have poisonous bites", says the code, and unless the hero saves against poison, "You feel a sting in your arm and now feel weaker".

[#f5e342]NetHack History[-]

The giant ant first appears in Hack 1.21 and Hack for PDP-11, which are based on Jay Fenlason's Hack, and is included in the initial bestiary for Hack 1.0. From these early versions to NetHack 2.3e, the giant ant uses the A glyph and is more similar in ability to the modern soldier ant. NetHack 3.0.0 introduces the ant or other insect monster class, moving the giant ant to a and introducing the soldier ant alongside it.