[#FFFFFF]These strange creatures live on a diet of metals. They can turn a suit of armor into so much useless rusted scrap in no time at all.[-]

[#8080a0]Description[-]

A rust monster is a pony-sized creature with a squat, humped body, four insectoid legs, a lumpy hide and two long antennae that rust or corrode any metal they touch. The Monster Manual describes its habits:

    "Rust monsters inhabit only dark subterranean places. They roam such places in search of their food - metals of all sorts, but principally ferrous based metals such as iron, steel, and steel alloys... Rust monsters can smell metal at 9" distance."
    - Monster Manual (1977), p. 83

Magic items resist: each plus gives a 10% chance to escape the rust. Weapons that strike the creature are affected just as if its antennae had touched them. Rogue took its armor class of 2 and its 5 hit dice from this entry.

[#f5e342]Origin[-]

Like the Owlbear, the Rust Monster is one of the original monsters created by Gary Gygax. Inspired by a toy he picked up for his game since most miniatures were for armies and not horrifying monsters, he created a creature that could not physically hurt you, but the mental damage it inflicted was far worse. In an interview with Dragon magazine, Gygax tells of how he came up with the Rust Monster.

"When I picked up a bag of plastic monsters made in Hong Kong at the local dime store to add to the sand table array … there was the figurine that looked rather like a lobster with a propeller on its tail … nothing very fearsome came to mind… Then inspiration struck me. It was a Rust Monster."

- Gary Gygax in Dragon Magazine #88 (1984)

The Rust Monster was introduced in the Greyhawk Supplement (1974) and might be one of the more interesting monsters to be introduced in this edition. Not only is it more than just a typical monster that goes around murdering in a dungeon, but it also has a special way of dealing with adventurers that helps it stand out. We can only imagine the look of confusion at Gary Gygax’s table as he puts down his little toy Rust Monster and told everyone to roll their initiative… promptly followed by his uncontrollable giggling. They had no idea what was heading for them.

[#f5e342]Rogue Trivia[-]

The rust monster holds R in Rogue 3.6. In 5.4 the letter belongs to the rattlesnake, and the armor-rusting attack has moved to the aquator.

It doesn't have any effective attack besides its rusting touch, which can degrade metal armor.

XRogue 8.0 also adds a disease attack to the rust monster, which can cause the player to lose strength.

Ultra Rogue had a bug until version 1.02 Alpha where attacking a rust monster with bare hands would cause a segmentation fault.

Ultra Rogue 1.0.8 also implements weapon rusting, which will degrade the player's weapon if they attack the rust monster with it.

In Advanced Rogue 5.8s, your weapon can also degrade, except if it's magically enchanted RELIC.

The rx1 rust monster follows the Monster Manual: a weapon that strikes it rusts too, though magic weapons have a 10% chance per plus to resist.
